Move PS content out of OneDrive (#388)
PowerShell/PowerShell-RFC: Draft-Accepted/RFC0066-PowerShell-User-Content-Location.md

`AppData` directory on Windows machines.

## Motivation

```
As a user,
I can customize the location where PowerShell user content is installed,
so that I can avoid problems created by file sync solutions like OneDrive.
```

- PowerShell currently places profile, modules, and configuration files in the user's Documents
  folder, which is against established conventions for shell configurations and tools.
- PowerShell content files in OneDrive can lead to unwanted syncing of module files, leading to
  various issues.
- There is strong community demand for changing this behavior as the current setup is problematic
  for many users.
- Changing the default location would align PowerShell with other developer tools and improve
  usability.

## Specification

- This will be an experimental feature.
- The content folder location change will only apply to PowerShell on Windows.
- Configurability of the content folder will apply to all platforms.
- A configuration file in the PowerShell user content folder will determine the location of the user
  scoped **PSModulePath**.
  - By default, the PowerShell user content folder will be located in the

>     `$env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\PowerShell`.

Author: ```suggestion
    `$env:LOCALAPPDATA\PowerShell`.
```

  - The new location becomes the location used as the `CurrentUser` scope for PSResourceGet.
- The proposed directory structure:

  ```
  C:\Users\UserName\AppData\Local\PowerShell\
  ├── powershell.config.json   (Not Configurable)
  └── <PSContent>              (Configurable)
      ├── Scripts                   (Not Configurable)
      ├── Modules                   (Not Configurable)
      ├── Help                      (Not Configurable)
      └── <*profile>.ps1            (Not Configurable)
  ```

- The following setting is added to the `powershell.config.json` file:

  **UserPSContentPath** specifies the full path of the content folder. The default value is
  `$env:LOCALAPPDATA\PowerShell\PSContent`. The user can change this value to a different path.

  ```json
  {

>       "UserPSContentPath" : "$env:LOCALAPPDATA\\PowerShell\\PSContent",

Reviewer: The issue is that on Linux, for example Modules, it's LOCALAppData\PowerShell by default (which dotnet does environment translation to XDG) and on windows it'll now be PowerShell\PSContent, so it'll be inconsistent, and if someone does this setting in a portable way, they'll have to account for those differences.

Is the PSContent folder really necessary? Why not just put Modules/Scripts/etc. in `LocalAppData/PowerShell` directly? Then it's the same path on both Windows and Linux (from a dotnet perspective), plus one less level of unnecessary hierarchy. Is there a problem the `PSContent` folder solves?

>       "UserPSContentPath" : "$env:LOCALAPPDATA\\PowerShell\\PSContent",

Author: We added the PSContent folder idea because we are trying to make the location customizable.

To achieve this we want to look at powershell.config to tell us where to look for the PSContent folder which will have everything PowerShell related.

On a side note, I think this also means the location of powershell.config has to be hardcoded and cannot be customized.
 
Interesting... I didn't know LocalApplicationData dotnet grabbed the linux equivalent like that.
I think Platform.XDG_Type.USER_MODULES already resolves to /home/user/.local/share/powershell

Currently for UNIX we grab the user module path like this:

```csharp
        internal static string GetPersonalModulePath()
        {
#if UNIX
            return Platform.SelectProductNameForDirectory(Platform.XDG_Type.USER_MODULES);
#else
            string myDocumentsPath = InternalTestHooks.SetMyDocumentsSpecialFolderToBlank ? string.Empty : Environment.GetFolderPath(Environment.SpecialFolder.MyDocuments);
            return string.IsNullOrEmpty(myDocumentsPath) ? null : Path.Combine(myDocumentsPath, Utils.ModuleDirectory);
#endif
        }
```

>       "UserPSContentPath" : "$env:LOCALAPPDATA\\PowerShell\\PSContent",

Reviewer 2: > On a side note, I think this also means the location of powershell.config has to be hardcoded and cannot be customized

Yes 👍 I expected the config file itself to be hardcoded.

Combined with no automatic content migration when the setting is changed, I don't see any risk of sharing the same powershell-folder for both content and config by default.

>       "UserPSContentPath" : "$env:LOCALAPPDATA\\PowerShell\\PSContent",

Author: I thought the PSContent sub folder would make it easier to move everything. But I think this can be achieved by addressing each item, Scripts, Modules, Help, and profile, individually.

>       "UserPSContentPath" : "$env:LOCALAPPDATA\\PowerShell\\PSContent",

Reviewer 3: We purposely chose to create the `PSContent` folder because there is already content in `$env:LOCALAPPDATA\PowerShell`. We don't want the scripts/modules/etc. getting lost among the other files.

  }
  ```

## User Experience

> - On startup PowerShell will create a directory in AppData and a configuration file.

Author: I'm thinking with the experimental feature turned on UserPSContentPath will be predefined in the config file pointing to the new "recommended" location in LocalAppData. But all of the directories will be empty and the user will have to migrate on their own. As of now for this migration we are thinking about providing an example script.

> - On startup PowerShell will create a directory in AppData and a configuration file.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good, as long as the machine config setting with variable support takes precedence. 🙂

> - On startup PowerShell will create a directory in AppData and a configuration file.

Author: The current behavior is to just point to the location, Install-Module is the one that creates the directory there.
OK will update.

## Other considerations

- The following functionalities will be affected:
  - SecretManagement
    - SecretManagement extension vaults are registered for the current user context in:
      `$env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\PowerShell\secretmanagement\secretvaultregistry\`

      When an extension vault is registered, SecretManagement stores the full path to the extension
      module in the registry. Moving the PowerShell content to a new location will break the vault
      registrations.
  - Document instructions on how to re-register vaults after moving the content folder.
  - Document the need to keep Modules in the Documents folder to so that SecretManagement
    continues to work for multiple installs of PowerShell 7 (stable and preview).

- Use the following script to copy the PowerShell contents folder:

  ```pwsh
  $newPath = "C:\Custom\PowerShell\Modules"
  $currentUserModulePath = [System.Environment]::GetFolderPath('MyDocuments') + "\PowerShell"
  Copy-Item -Path $currentUserModulePath -Destination $newPath -Recurse -Force
  ```

- PowerShellGet is hardcoded to install scripts and modules in the user's `Documents` folder. It
  will not support this feature.

> ## Implementation questions

Author: So far I see profile, help, scripts, and module paths need to use the new API that looks at the config.json or returns the default location LOCALAPPDATA.

- Will the experimental feature be enabled by default?
  - Recommendation: No, the user should explicitly enable the feature and copy their existing
    PowerShell user content to the new location.

- How does `$PROFILE` get populated?
  - Can profile scripts be moved to `PSContent`?
  - The feature needs to update `$PROFILE` to point to profile scripts in the new location.

- What happens if **UserPSContentPath** is added to the machine-level configuration file in
  `$PSHOME/powershell.config.json`?
  - Recommendation: Ignore the setting in the machine-level configuration file since this is a user

>     setting. No error - just ignore it.

Reviewer 4: Silent errors often lead to confusion. We should warn somewhere (i.e. Event Log, Write-Warning on launch, etc.).
If a system admin sets this expecting all their users to get migrated by default and nothing happens, it'll lead to confusion and frustration.

As a system administrator I may want to set this on a shared system where we would want to avoid users ever dealing with OneDrive issues. We should just match the existing precedent defined in `about_PowerShell_Config`.

Author: I'm not sure if the following is relevant but I think it'll help with the discussion.

I took another look at the PSModulePath code and as of now machine scoped stuff is not in OneDrive but in program files and not in the documents.

I think we decided to leave this alone and not move anything out of there.

```csharp
        internal static string GetSharedModulePath()
        {
#if UNIX
            return Platform.SelectProductNameForDirectory(Platform.XDG_Type.SHARED_MODULES);
#else
            string sharedModulePath = Environment.GetFolderPath(Environment.SpecialFolder.ProgramFiles);

            if (!string.IsNullOrEmpty(sharedModulePath))
            {
                sharedModulePath = Path.Combine(sharedModulePath, Utils.ModuleDirectory);
            }

            return sharedModulePath;
#endif
        }
```

Will need some clarification from @sdwheeler for this

> - Will **UserPSContentPath** support environment variables (like `$env:USERNAME` or `%USERNAME%`)?

Author: I think yes the goal is to support environment variables. I think this would be very useful.
But for machine-wide config I think we are not touching those that are in program files at this time. We are only trying to move the user PSContent folder out of myDocuments

> - Will **UserPSContentPath** support environment variables (like `$env:USERNAME` or `%USERNAME%`)?

Reviewer 5: We should not do what ADO YAML does or reinvent a new syntax like it but we need a suitable cross plat one that is recommended. Perhaps using the `ENV:\` PSDrive path could be an option - thoughts on that @daxian-dbw ?

if the PowerShell.Config was a psd1 not json you'd get rid of some of the many headaches that json & Yaml bring us.

We also really should build these files and pre-populate the full path, not do a potentially dangerous lookup operation.

Seperate note - Machine level config should also really move to ProgramData on Windows out of ProgramFiles but is out scope for this RFC

> - Will **UserPSContentPath** support environment variables (like `$env:USERNAME` or `%USERNAME%`)?

Reviewer 2: PowerShell syntax was just a OS-neutral example from my side. My expectation was access to OS system/user/process variables in a cross-platform compatible format, not PowerShell expressions. 👍 

> Perhaps using the ENV:\ PSDrive path could be an option

IMO this would add to the confusion that it may be resolved in a runspace.

> - Will **UserPSContentPath** support environment variables (like `$env:USERNAME` or `%USERNAME%`)?

Reviewer 6: @jshigetomi That's fine, but I think the bottom line is that we are not going to evaluate the string value as a PowerShell expression. So, the question is more on how to support those pre-defined variables :)

---
RFC: RFC0066
Author: Justin Chung
Status: Draft
SupercededBy: N/A
Version: 1.0
Area: Core
Comments Due: 07/31/2025
Plan to implement: Yes
---

# PowerShell User Content Location

This RFC proposes moving the current PowerShell user content location out of OneDrive &

> default to the `AppData` directory on Windows machines.

Reviewer 5: If this is AppData then this would be `$env:AppData` which is the roaming profile location not the local profile one. Please correct  to `LocalAppData`

so that I can avoid problems created by file sync solutions like OneDrive.

As an Admin,
I must be able to customize the location set for my users either pre/during/post install,
so that I can better manage my environment and better secure and support my users,
to reduce unnecessary support tickets to my IT Team.
```

- PowerShell currently places profile, modules, and configuration files in the user's Documents
  folder, which is against established conventions for shell configurations and tools.
- PowerShell content files in OneDrive can lead to unwanted syncing of module files, leading to
  various issues.
- There is strong community demand for changing this behavior as the current setup is problematic
  for many users.
- Changing the default location would align PowerShell with other developer tools and improve
  usability.

## Specification

- This will be an experimental feature.
- The content folder location change will only apply to PowerShell on Windows.
- Configurability of the content folder will apply to all platforms.
- A configuration file in the PowerShell user content folder will determine the location of the user
  scoped **PSModulePath**.

>   - By default, the PowerShell user content folder will be located in the
>     `$env:LOCALAPPDATA\PowerShell`.

Reviewer 5: This needs to be in the Microsoft Folder, on the off chance an organisation wants to fork PowerShell and use their own Org Location alongside use of Microsoft Releases.
```suggestion
  - By default, the PowerShell user content folder will be located in the
    `$env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\PowerShell`.
```

Reviewer: I would argue it should stay there to maintain existing Linux path consistency. If an org wants to use their own then they can specify that nested path at their leisure.

  - The new location becomes the location used as the `CurrentUser` scope for PSResourceGet.
- The proposed directory structure:

  ```

>   C:\Users\UserName\AppData\Local\PowerShell\

Reviewer 5: As above 
```suggestion
  C:\Users\UserName\AppData\Local\Microsoft\PowerShell\
```

  ├── powershell.config.json   (Not Configurable)
  ├── Scripts                  (Configurable)
  ├── Modules                  (Configurable)
  ├── Help                     (Configurable)
  └── <*profile>.ps1           (Configurable)
  ```

- The following setting is added to the `powershell.config.json` file:

>   **UserPSContentPath** specifies the full path of the content folder. The default value is
>   `$env:LOCALAPPDATA\PowerShell`. The user can change this value to a different path.

Reviewer 5: Same again
```suggestion
  **UserPSContentPath** specifies the full path of the content folder. The default value is
  `$env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\PowerShell`. The user can change this value to a different path.
```

  ```json
  {

>       "UserPSContentPath" : "$env:LOCALAPPDATA\\PowerShell",

Reviewer 5: Same Again
```suggestion
      "UserPSContentPath" : "$env:LOCALAPPDATA\\Microsoft\\PowerShell",
```

  }
  ```

## User Experience

- On startup PowerShell will create a directory in AppData and a configuration file.
- The user scoped **PSModulePath** will point to `Modules` folder under the location specified by
  **UserPSContentPath**.
- Users can configure a custom location for PowerShell user content by changing the value of
  **UserPSContentPath**.
- Users will initially need to manually move/copy their existing PowerShell user content 
  from the Documents folder to the new location after enabling the feature.
- We intend to add a new cmdlet to aid this process in a future release shortly 
  after this work has been completed as part of the work into hopefully the 7.6.0 GA
  release or another 7.6.x release. Details on this to follow.

## Other considerations

- The following functionalities will be affected:
  - SecretManagement
    - SecretManagement extension vaults are registered for the current user context in:

>       `$env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\PowerShell\secretmanagement\secretvaultregistry\`

Reviewer 5: This is why we need to keep it in this `$env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\PowerShell\` path as to reduce configuration location sprawl & simplify documentation

      When an extension vault is registered, SecretManagement stores the full path to the extension
      module in the registry. Moving the PowerShell content to a new location will break the vault
      registrations.
  - Document instructions on how to re-register vaults after moving the content folder.
  - Document the need to keep Modules in the Documents folder to so that SecretManagement
    continues to work for multiple installs of PowerShell 7 (stable and preview).

- Use the following script to copy the PowerShell contents folder:

  ```pwsh
  $newPath = "C:\Custom\PowerShell\Modules"
  $currentUserModulePath = [System.Environment]::GetFolderPath('MyDocuments') + "\PowerShell"
  Copy-Item -Path $currentUserModulePath -Destination $newPath -Recurse -Force
  ```

- PowerShellGet is hardcoded to install scripts and modules in the user's `Documents` folder. It

>   will not support this feature.

Reviewer 5: We may need to recommend regualar checks for resources installed via PowerShellGet 

However it also would be a good opportunity for us to actually look at the removal of PowerShellGet & PackageManagement (the sooner the better IMO!) 
This however is sadly really a question that is out of scope for this RFC but closely aligned.

> - The following are required changes to PowerShell due to the content folder change:
>   - Profile path will need to use the API to get the content folder path.
>   - Updateable help path needs to use the API to get the content folder path.
>   - Scripts path will need to use the API to get the content folder path.
>   - Module path will ned to use the API to get the content folder path.

Reviewer 5: Reduced wording
```suggestion
- The following Path changes are required in PowerShell due to the content folder change & will be retrived via the API:
  - Profile.
  - Updateable Help.
  - Scripts.
  - Modules.
```

    - SecretManagement extension vaults are registered for the current user context in:
      `$env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\PowerShell\secretmanagement\secretvaultregistry\`

      When an extension vault is registered, SecretManagement stores the full path to the extension
      module in the registry. Moving the PowerShell content to a new location will break the vault
      registrations.
  - Document instructions on how to re-register vaults after moving the content folder.
  - Document the need to keep Modules in the Documents folder to so that SecretManagement
    continues to work for multiple installs of PowerShell 7 (stable and preview).
  - Provide a script to show users what vault modules are registered today and their hardcoded paths.

- Use the following script to copy the PowerShell contents folder:

  ```pwsh
  $newPath = "C:\Custom\PowerShell\Modules"
  $currentUserModulePath = [System.Environment]::GetFolderPath('MyDocuments') + "\PowerShell"
  Copy-Item -Path $currentUserModulePath -Destination $newPath -Recurse -Force
  ```

- PowerShellGet is hardcoded to install scripts and modules in the user's `Documents` folder. It
  will not support this feature.

> - The following Path changes are required in PowerShell due to the content folder change & will be retrived via the API:

Reviewer 7: > via the API

There's no other mention of this API in the RFC, and afaict there's currently no public API to retrieve paths to these directories, right? Should this RFC also describe the proposed API, or is that part of another RFC (that should probably be linked here)?

    so that I can avoid problems created by file sync solutions like OneDrive.

## User Experience

- On startup PowerShell will create a directory in AppData and a configuration file.
- In the configuration file the user scoped PSModulePath will point to AppData/PowerShell/Modules.
- Users can opt out of this new location by specifying a desired user scoped module path in the configuration file.

## Specification

- The content folder location change will only apply to PowerShell on Windows.
- Configurability of the content folder will apply to all systems.
- This will be an experimental feature.
- The PowerShell user content folder will be located in the `$env:LOCALAPPDATA\Microsoft\PowerShell`.
- A configuration file in the PowerShell user content folder will determine the location of the user scoped PSModulePath.
- The user will be responsible for specifying thier desired install location using PSResourceGet.
- The location of Modules is configurable
- The location of this folder is not configurable.
- The proposed directory structure:

    C:\Users\UserName\AppData\Local\PowerShell\
    ├── PSContent                 (Configurable)

>     └── PSModulePathConfig.json   (Not Configurable)

Author: That currently resides in One Drive/Documents.
I'm not opposed to using that since it already exists. @sdwheeler thoughts on this?

>     └── PSModulePathConfig.json   (Not Configurable)

Reviewer 3: I agree it should be `powershell.config.json`. We have updated the draft with a lot more detail.
